feat: add uv plugin (#930)
canonical/craft-parts: docs/common/craft-parts/reference/plugins/uv_plugin.rst

.. _craft_parts_uv_plugin:

uv plugin
=========

The uv plugin can be used for Python projects that use the uv build tool.

Keywords
--------

A sequence of subsections specifying the keywords provided by the plugin and
describe how the plugin uses them using the same format for keywords used in

> the :ref:`part_properties` reference.

Reviewer: This looks like it's leftover text from the template.

In addition to the common :ref:`plugin <part-properties-plugin>` and
:ref:`sources <part-properties-sources>` keywords, this plugin provides the
following plugin-specific keywords:

uv-extras
~~~~~~~~~
**Type:** list of strings

Extra dependency groups to build with. Each element of the list is passed
exactly as ``--extra GROUP``.

Environment variables
---------------------

> Along with the variables defined by the :ref:`Python plugin <craft_parts_python_plugin-environment_variables>`,
> this plugin defines additional variables defined below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Along with the environment variables defined by the :ref:`Python plugin
<craft_parts_python_plugin-environment_variables>`, this plugin responds to its
own special variables.
```

.. note::

>     This section describes how this plugin uses ``uv``-specific variables. For
>     more information, as well as a complete list of environment variables
>     for ``uv``, see the `uv documentation <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/environment/>`__.

Reviewer: Small formatting convention that I'm trying to enforce:

- For software names, even if they share the name with their CLI command and start with a lowercase letter, inline code isn't needed.
- When you _are_ talking about the software's command, then dressing it with inline code is fine.

A convention that started before me was that we use two spaces for indentation in RST.

```suggestion
  This section describes how this plugin uses uv-specific environment variables. For
  more information, as well as a complete list of environment variables
  for uv, see the `uv documentation <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/environment/>`_.
```

UV_FROZEN
~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** true

Whether or not to update the :file:`uv.lock` file. If true, :file:`uv.lock`
must exist and will be used as the single source of truth for dependency
versions, with no attempt made to update them before installation.

UV_PROJECT_ENVIRONMENT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** See below

> A filepath to the Python virtual environment to build with. By default, this

Reviewer: > filepath

I prefer "path" for simplicity and abstracting away complexities around symlinks, API endpoints, and so forth, but YMMV.

> variable populates itself with the directory that this plugin will create the
> virtual environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variable populates itself with the directory that this plugin will create in the
virtual environment.
```

Author: This is correct - this variable is the path to the virtual environment itself that the plugin will make, not an existing virtual environment that it modifies. Is the phrasing bad?

Reviewer 2: How about

```suggestion
variable populates itself with the directory in which this plugin will create
the virtual environment.
```

UV_PYTHON_DOWNLOADS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** never

Whether or not to automatically download Python if the requested version is

> missing.

Reviewer: Since the default is a non-standard enum `never`, should we describe how to turn it on? Is the complement `always`? This is the first time I'm running into this in our projects, so if this is an existing pattern, ignore me.

Reviewer 2: It's a string, so maybe put it in quotes to indicate that?

UV_PYTHON
~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** ``PARTS_PYTHON_INTERPRETER``

The version of Python that ``uv`` should use. See 
:ref:`Python plugin environment variables <craft_parts_python_plugin-environment_variables>`
for more information.

A sequence of subsections specifying the environment variables that the plugin
defines in the build environment, their default values, and what they are

> typically used for.

Reviewer: This looks like more template text.

UV_PYTHON_PREFERENCE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** only-system

> Whether ``uv`` should prefer system or ``uv``-managed Python versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether uv should prefer system or uv-managed Python versions.
```

> Whether ``uv`` should prefer system or ``uv``-managed Python versions.

Reviewer: Same as an earlier comment; should we describe what the other possible values are?

Author: This one is much less standard and actually required some digging - the uv documentation page I link didn't say either! I'll add the other values.

Dependencies
------------

> ``uv`` must already be installed on the build system in order to use this
> plugin. For installation instructions, see `uv documentation <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uv must already be installed on the build system in order to use this plugin.
For installation instructions, see the `uv documentation
<https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/>`_.
```

How it works
------------

During the build step, the plugin performs the following actions:

> * It creates a virtual environment directly into the ``${CRAFT_PART_INSTALL}``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It creates a virtual environment in the ``${CRAFT_PART_INSTALL}``
```

This was a typo in the original document. :(
